---
id: 896
title: Version 3.3.0
date: 2018-04-15 00:58:19 -0500
author: William Bittle
layout: post
guid: http://www.dyn4j.org/?p=896
permalink: /2018/04/version-3-3-0/
image: /assets/gears.jpg
categories:
  - News
  - Release
tags:
  - dyn4j
---
This release was focused on Java 9, OSGi, and Maven but also includes some behavior changes and performance improvements.

<!--more-->

For those just using the library, the behavior changes to be aware of are:

  * The GJK algorithm has changed slighty.  It now exits after N number of iterations.  This has been changed to ensure that the algorithm doesn&#8217;t run forever in some rare instances.  If you need to go back to the original behavior you can set the maximum number of iterations to Integer.MAX_VALUE, but it&#8217;s not recommended.
  * The ContactListener.sensed method is deprecated now and is no longer being called.  Instead, you will get notifications of sensed contacts through the other methods (begin, persist, etc.). This was done so that sensed contacts have the same lifecycle as normal contacts.  There&#8217;s a flag on the Contact argument that flags the contact as a sensor contact.
  * Some of the ContactListener methods should return true or false, indicating whether the contact should be solved or not.  The behavior here has changed a bit.  Before 3.3.0 the processing of that contact would halt whenever false was returned and drop the contact.  The new behavior is that the contact proceeds as normal through the pipeline, but is just disabled from contact resolution.  The effect is the same, apart from the fact that all caching information and the contact&#8217;s state is retained.